Our organization escorted the paratroopers in
and the gliders. Was this the evening before
D-Day? No, it wasn't. Or was it at the same time?
Same time, on D-Day. On D-Day, when the gliders
went in, we were escorting the ships towing the
gliders. The paratroopers went in. I think land
first, and then the gliders came in. And did you
help plan where they were going to land? Yeah.
Well, not where they were going to land. No, I was
only planning our escort, giving them, planning
the times. We flew by squadrons, and we had
squadrons taking off at that time to rendezvous
with one of the, each one of the trains of gliders.
Were you upset that you weren't going to be in? I was
very upset that I wasn't participating, but they
said that everybody that knew what the plans were,
none of us could fly on that day. I did fly the next
day. Now when you flew the next day, what was your
mission? We were supporting the troops on the
ground.
We were given either targets or we were ported in to
the ground controller that he directed us. And
that's
what we did the rest
of the work. And we covered that until the
breakthrough. And we covered Patton all the way
across. So you worked directly with Third Army?
Yeah. We had to fill our wing tanks with maps and
take them up there and drop
them. If Patton would liberate one of the German
Army's warehouses, he'd send us a truckload of
booze of some type. He'd send us Cointreau. We'd
have free Cointreau at the bar. Later on, we
liberated the champagne caves. We had free
champagne at the bar. I think we sold a nickel a
bottle or something like that. And if he got in
Germany, he'd be with the snobs.
He was very, very well
thought of
by us in what he was doing. And he didn't forget who
was helping him either. I was wondering about when
you flew across the channel on the day after D-Day,
D-plus-1, you must have seen, what were your
impressions when you saw it? Oh, it was exciting.
And all of the ships were out there in the harbor. It
was just exciting. It really made you feel a lot of
pride in what we were doing. wanted to get on with.
We were really excited. And we were one of the first
units to get transferred over into. That was going
to be my next question. Where were you transferred
in France? We went to Pont Tarzan, which is right at
the base of the Brittany Peninsula,
right down the road from Mont Saint-Michel. a
very famous tourist
place there based in Britain. How were the
conditions? Well, we had a pure steel plant runway
that the engineers
had built. We had an old chateau where there group
headquarters was. We had
some barracks for the men that the Germans
had been using. We had our men sleep there. It was so
much better accommodations than we had in England
where we were living in tents. We thought it was
good. How'd the French people treat you? Were they
happy to see you? Oh, I'll say. They were really
number one. Boy, they couldn't do enough for us.
They were really excited. They told stories of how
the Germans had been bailing out of this barracks
that they had, jumping out of the second story.
They were
very emotional. Extremely. They couldn't, they
just couldn't do enough for us. What did they do for
you? I mean, did they give you food or wine or
anything? Oh,
they, they gave us, you know, they'd give you food
and wine if you wanted. If we had food, we went to the
Moe Sammy Shell and we'd have a 12 course dinner
with wine.
Sometimes we had to furnish part of the food,
though, like
meat or something like that. We had everything
there. We had chicken, eggs. I remember Madame
Foulard, a very famous eating establishment.
Madame Foulard and Tom, they were all famous. We
thought we were doing pretty high time. And how
often did you fly a mission whenever the Army
needed your assistance? Yes, we had Frag orders
that came in. It was fairly often.
Were you involved after the breakout, were you
involved in supporting the liberation of Paris?
Or were you moving? Yes. We were indirectly
involved because we were bombing, and we
leapfrogged up and back near there. And it so
happens that one of our men, who was the best man at
my wedding, by the way, a close friend of mine, was
shot down on one of these ground support missions.
And he was in Paris after the As they were
liberating Paris, a general had left and left his
colonel in charge, and the colonel surrendered to
my captain, Pete Carson. Surrendered the city to
him. And he said that was really exciting.
It really whined at that. He finally made his way
back to where we were. I
noticed that in October of 1944, just a few months
after the invasion, you became the commander of
the 365th Fighter Squadron. Yes. Were you
promoted at that time?
Well, I went over as a first lieutenant, and I was
later promoted to captain. I was an operations
officer for a flight commander, and then I was an
operations officer. Then I was made squadron
commander. I was promoted to major. Yeah, you were
promoted November 1, 1944 to major. And I was made
squadron commander of another squadron.
We had gotten a new group commander by that time.
He really influenced me a lot. Well, we had a, who
was it? James B. Tipton. He retired late at night.
We had a guy in charge, Cecil Wells, a group
commander. During the time we trained, when we
went over, and he got shot down. But he was too
conservative in our community. He was what we
called a grandma. A grandma? Yeah. He was always
afraid that we were going to do something, taking
these boys over, and he wanted to bring every damn
one of them back. He just was too conservative and
wouldn't let us be aggressive. And we got this guy
Tipton in. He showed me how to turn an organization
around, how to raise morale, how to get a spree to
court. We painted the tails of our airplanes
orange. And we got word later on that the Germans
knew when they saw the orange tails, they all ran
for cover because they knew we were going to get to
hell. beat on it. And we compiled a in the Oval
Record after this guy joined us. We just turned the
whole organization. Was he a general? No, he was a
colonel. But he was your colonel and you were the
major under him. Yeah. Was morale low under this
earlier man? He wasn't low.
We were frustrated, more frustrated, because he
didn't let us go.
He was too protective.
This guy just turned the whole organization
around, and we got three presidential citations.
Did cash OPs also increase? We had plenty of
casualties anyway. It was no great deal.
Well, we were fortunate,
too, but when the Germans
had passed on We had the
lousy weather and it was gruesome the first day we
did take off. Unfortunately, three squadrons of
us got up there and one squadron just ran into all
kinds of enemy aircraft and shot a bunch of them
down and our squadron didn't even see one. But we
got up there, and
we
got comments back later about how appreciative
they were when we got up there. And we did, even
though the weather was loud. We couldn't really
see the ground, but
we were overhead. And later on, after the weather
cleared up, we did the job on five minutes
straight. And did you knock out the major target
was probably the German tanks? Yes, tanks. We had
rockets for tanks. Did you knock some of those out
just now?
Oh, yeah. We disabled them at least. We knocked
them out
completely. What were your feelings when you did
disable a tank? It was a feeling of relation,
and you couldn't wait to get back to talk about it.
That's sort of doing your job. Well, that was sort
of characteristic of
fighter pilots, to get up early and get briefed and
get off and get off on the mission. And at that time,
we would turn them around, maybe three missions a
day. No kidding. During the, as it cleared up, as
far as the Battle of the Bulge, the airplanes would
go up for three missions a day. The fighters, what,
one mission a day, or the fighters? Sometimes the
pilots would go up for more than once. Sometimes
two missions a day. Of
course, the...
A lot depended on the weather and what was going on
and what the ground forces needed. And did you feel
threatened by the Battle of the Bulge? We all felt
threatened by the Battle of the Bulge, yes. But we
didn't think it was going
to—we didn't think that they would be able to stop
us.
That would only be temporary. Yeah, which it was.
Sure. Absolutely. Now, when you became the
commander of the fighter squadron, how many
planes did you have under your control? We had 25.
You personally had 25? Yeah. And how many pilots?
We had about 30 pilots. How many maintenance
personnel?
About a hundred. About a hundred? What were your
feelings when you received, this is your first
command, is that not right? Well, the first
overall command, yes. And what were your
feelings? I was proud, very proud,
and very eager
to do the best I could. take care of my men and
get them in the air. Were there major challenges?
Or was this pretty much carrying on? What were your
predecessors left off? Or did you have to make some
changes? We had to make some changes because we
were in a moving situation. We had to improvise and
we scrounged stuff and built ourselves a
operations building and then
moved in boarded up all our tents so the man had a
better place
to live it was really a scrounging job to get things
for
your people and did you like the role of leadership
I
guess
I enjoyed
it very much. I looked at it as a challenge to see if I
could inspire my people to do better and instill in
them a spirit cooperation,
esprit de corps, want to get the job done. Do you
think you accomplished that? I think I did. I think
we had as good a squadron as we rode over. What type
of airplanes did you have? 47. You still had the 47,
so the whole time.
What was your opinion on the 47? We loved the P-47.
It was a great airplane. You can't imagine the
things that we went through when we came back. One
boy had a cylinder shot off the top of it, lost all
his oil, and threw all of it back. That's
durability. And one of my airplanes, the one that I
had my name on, everybody had his own airplane. He
didn't get to fly it. unless it was ready when he
came up with the schedule for his mission. If it was
ready, well, he took it. One of my friends from
Texas, Bryce Littlejohn from Marshall, had my
airplane one day and an FW-190 or a Focke-Wulf 190
or an ME-109 or one of the others got on his tail and
put 108 bullet holes This airplane was mine. But he
got it back. No kidding, didn't he? He got a piece of
equipment. Yeah. It was a real workhorse. It was a
real sturdy, sturdily built airplane. It could
take a punch. It had an armored seat. Eight machine
guns. It could carry three 1,000-pound bombs.
I was also wondering, when you became the
commander, did this mean that you still got to go
out on the missions, or did this reduce the number
of missions you went on and increase the amount of
administrative work? It increased the amount of
administrative work tremendously, but I still
tried to fly regularly.
Probably not every day, but every other day or so.
I had 122 missions, I think. You didn't have
122 missions? Were there any differences when you
moved from fighting in France to Germany?
Well, when we moved into Germany, we moved into an
old Luftwaffe base, and we had fine quarters for
our men. Where'd you move? You moved from this
French base up in Brittany to, your next move then
was into German, into the Luftwaffe base?
We moved, we spent the winter at this one near
Nancy, and then our next move was into Germany.
Where?
My memory's bad. Well, we can fill that in later.
OK. Describe the base for me. It was an old
Luftwaffe base. It had big pillows with swat
stickers on it going inside. It had nice big
barracks and a good runway. They
didn't destroy it? Why not? They may have
destroyed a few things on it. They didn't ruin the
runway? They got out too quickly. They hadn't
moved in too quickly. They really did. Now, of
course, when you'd come back and land, you'd land
back in Germany. Did you ever have any dealings
during the war time with the German people?
Not really. Not until after the war. Okay. Okay.
You continued through the end of the war then,
right down to April, May 1945, to get support to the
Third Army. Yeah. That was your primary mission
then? Well, no. No, that's not true. Oh, okay. Then
what was?
The 7th Army came up from the south. And after the
7th Army came up, then we were transferred to the
19th Tactical Air Command and the 9th Tactical Air
Command. And we covered the 7th Army from then on.
We covered the 7th Army and then from then on came
the war. Were there any differences in working the
3rd versus the 7th?
Well, the 7th
didn't have all the tanks and armor, although they
had some. Sure. But
until the winter was over, we were pretty well
stagnated, it seemed to me. They weren't moving
much.
We waited until the spring and moved out. Our
relationship with them were very good. Did they
supply you like that? Did they try to keep you
around? Well, no, they didn't do that, but they did
visit us.
And we worked with him. We sent forward air
controllers up to work with him. We had that direct
association through our pilots. They would go up
to the ground controllers with riding tanks with
them and direct the aircraft
in to the targets. April of 1945, you changed jobs,
and you became the air inspector. Is that right? At
the 64th Fighter Wing. Why? Why'd they change you
from combat duty to an inspector position? Well,
combat was over. Basically. Basically over.
Well, it was over before I left.
They figured the group would be going home. I
wanted to stay, so I took this job to the golf
course. You wanted to stay on. You had made up your
mind that you did not want to go back to the United
States, even though... No, I wanted to go into the
city. Okay, that's just the next question. And I
had made arrangements with this wing who said they
were going, and I wanted to go with them.
I was picked off the 64th. The 12th Tactical Air
Command? I thought they were gone? No, there was
another one. It was a medium bomber.
I
was picked off the 64th, and then the 12th
Tactical, the boss of the 64th, pulled me out of
there. and put me in the Air Inspector's job. And
then they had a colonel come in and he came in and
they put him over me, so I was an assistant
Air Inspector. Did you like the job of being an
inspector? I didn't particularly relish the job
of being an inspector, but I did learn a lot. I
learned a whole lot as an inspector. About what?
About administration. of different modes of the
Air Force. And I got ideas from other people on how
to do things. And gave them some, too. How to get the
job done. Yes. What were the problems in Germany
right as soon as the war ended, as far as the Air
Force was concerned? Well, number one problem was
BD. Yeah, I would imagine.
How'd you
try to resolve those? Well, it was made a command
function to resolve them. And what did you do to try
to, I mean, what actions did you take? You mean as
the air inspector? Yeah. Well, we brought the
problems to the attention of the command. And they
took it
from
there. We took over the air drone at Swineford. And
that's where I started working in the journey.
Before we started working with the Germans,
during this time did you also work with the
Russians? No. I never saw a Russian. You never saw a
Russian? Did you ever hear any stories about the
Russians? Or did you ever have any feelings toward
the Russians one way or the other? Well, I felt that
I strongly feel that Mr.
Roosevelt He gave away the
fact that, I mean, he gave away the option of us
going and being into Berlin first, which we would
be. I think he gave that away to Mr. Stalin. And we
were damn mad about it. All of us. Because you
wanted to continue on into Berlin? I wanted to
continue on into Berlin, and we wanted to...
We wanted to get as much of Germany as we could
before the Russians got there. Well, they were our
allies at the time, much as they were. Why did you
want to commit your troops and take on the
possibility of more American bloodshed if they
were going to be our allies? Well, we didn't think
that we were going to be more American, much more
than any bloodshed, or if any. We think that it was
all political. We
did not like the Russians. You didn't like the
Russians even before the war was over? Even before
the war was over, because of communism.
But you didn't work with any Russians yourself?
No. This is just the general feeling. The general
feeling. OK.
What was your mission as the commander of the 86th
Fighter Group? You said you started working with
the Germans. In what way? Well, no, we worked with
the local Germans. Okay. Burgermeisters and
stuff. We had to
coordinate the supplies and stuff. assist in
getting themselves back on their
own feet and taking care of themselves. We had a
mission of flying and making our presence known.
We flew regularly all over just to let them know
that we were
there. And we stayed prepared to it. to fight, too.
And if anything happened, we would have worked
with the Army, who had taken over the, who had these
political officers, I guess you'd call them, that
took over
the supervision of the government of the
Burgermeister.
And we had a liaison with them. And then we, of
course, had this air base. We had some of the German
people there that worked there and continued
working.
And we had some displaced persons. They may have
been Russians or they may have been Poles. I don't
know what they were that we had to send back. Well,
we used them as civilian employees on the base. We
fed them, housed them. Did you eventually have to
send them back? We turned them over to the Army. I
don't know what
they did. How did you get along with the conquered
enemy? We didn't have any problems. No problems
with the Germans? No. Except we had problems with
BD. What were the feelings toward the Germans?
Well, we weren't particularly hostile. We
thought they
were a victim of hit and run. And I can remember when
I first went with the 12th Tactical Air Command, my
friend and I moved into a doctor's house. He left
everything there.
We just went in. We never saw him.
It didn't last long, but it was quite nice. And our
quarters at Swineford were very good, too. Of
course, that place had been beaten up. We had
bombed that several times, but we put in our own
runway. There was still a plank runway. Some of the
barracks were undamaged and used then.
When you heard that the United States dropped the
atomic bomb and that the war in the Pacific was
over, how did you feel about that?
Well, I was glad to hear it was
over. I think we all were. It was a relief, too. Yet
at the same time, now you wouldn't be able to have
more combat missions. Well, that wasn't going to
bother me. It was over.
That's not to say that I want to go out and apply
combat. Just apply combat. I don't. It's scary.
It's not... It's not... I think it's hazardous to
your health. Yeah, that's right. It's surgeon
general, like I said. I got shot up, I guess, at
least 15 times. You did? Yeah. Shot down once,
but shot up. Do you consider yourself lucky? Very
lucky. Extremely lucky. Were you, besides your
nose,
During
this time, 1945 to 1947, America's armed forces
dwindled from 12 million down to a million and a
half. Rapid demobilization. Explosive
demobilization, I'd say. That was the situation
in Germany. The rail was low, and people had lots of
points. He had morale problems like what I
did. Farmed a football team.
A classmate of mine at this point now that coaches.
We won the USA championship. No kidding. We had a
lot of fun. So in other words, you directed
sporting events. Yeah. Well, we had other things
too. We got him the permission to go deer hunting.
Really? Yeah. We shot a lot of deer. Where'd they
go? They went in the woods. There were lots of woods
in town. Oh, yeah. And lots of deer.
We enjoyed venison, too. For officers and men?
Yeah. Did you set up an officer's club and EM club?
Oh, yes. They had nice... And they also had Red
Cross clubs. Did you try to bring in movies or movie
stars? We had movies.
And then we started there. We had B.B. Daniels at
the Pond Tarsen right after B. Day. We had Spike
Jones stayed with us at Pond Tarsen for just a
couple of weeks. And they went out to the various
Army units. Of course, we were Army too then. And
played for them and played for us at our club. And
they stood in. We set up an officer's club and an
enlisted man's club everywhere we went. We did it
with a tent.
As far as... Good for morale. Sure. And did you
actually feel that you increased more? Yes. We had
hires for you in our organization, Michael. Very
much. All your friends and a lot of the associates
and a lot of pilots
back into civilian life. At any time did you feel
that you wanted to go back into civilian life? None
whatsoever. As a matter of fact, my father offered
me the opportunity. He said before he wanted me to
come in the business with me and my brother. He
said, no, I want to stay in the
airport. Thought I found a career. I enjoyed
flying.
I don't understand it. I thought
it was an opportunity. It gave me an opportunity as
a major to have a colonel's job. And I was on the list
to be promoted to lieutenant colonel when the war
ended. No, they didn't. No, they realized
demobilization, they wouldn't need that many
officers. Okay, so through 1946, until 1946, you
were the deputy commander of 64th Fighter Wing?
Well, that was a consolidation. It looks like it.
It was a consolidation of the Fighter Wing and the
group. And they just moved the Fighter Wing, which
looked at a a town near there that moved them out
there to the air base. And the wing ran the group, I
mean ran the organization there, and also all the
other fighter planes that were
under. So it was just a... Well, there was a lot of
consolidation at this time. They sent the 86
fighter group home. and the people that were
eligible to go, went. The rest of the regular
officers that were there stayed,
and the others that didn't have enough
points to go. In 1946, though, you have a rather
unusual assignment, which lasts from May 46 to
September 47, and that's that the officers
I was a master of the sword. Oh, what's a master of
the sword? It's the physical education
department. And what did you do there? This is kind
of an unusual assignment for a fighter pilot.
It wasn't the Air Force then, I was in the Army
still. Yeah, sure, still the Army Air Corps. And
West Point had pretty high priority on selecting
who they wanted for instructors. And I was
selected by the
Director of Physical Education, if you will, or
the Master of the Sword, to come there and be a...
What I did, I came home on R&R expecting to go back to
Germany and get a good job in the 64th Fighter Wing.
But while I was home on R&R, my orders were changed
and I was sent to West Point to be an instructor.
What were your feelings about that? I was highly
pissed off. I wanted to be, I got married, and I
wanted to be the first guy back to Germany with his
wife. And my classmate, one of my classmates did
just that. He was the first guy to have his wife over
there. Because by this time, the Army allowed
people to have dependents. Yeah. But you could
still have her at West Point. Oh, I did. Two of our
children were born there. And she enjoyed
wrestling.
And I did enjoy it, too. But I did not want to get out
of flying airplanes. And did you like instructing
cadets? I enjoyed them. And physical education.
Yeah, I know. But what type? I mean, what did you?
Well, I taught wrestling. Wrestling. And I was on
the wrestling team. I taught wrestling. I taught
administration of athletic programs. I taught
football coaching. I
taught calisthenics. Why do you have an engineer
teaching this? I wasn't an engineer. Well, true,
you were an army officer, but you had an
engineering background and a mathematical
background.
They select the instructors up there based on
their records. I had played football and I coached
football there in my last year
as one of the coaches there. I played lacrosse and I
played a lot of sports and of course
the wrestling team.
this was the type of person that he wanted. Now, is
there any tension between the returning
veterans, combat hardened veterans, and the new
cadets who are just starting out at West Point? Any
tension, or do they look up to you, or, you know,
this is a peculiar time? No, because they had in
the, they had in the, in the, in the Corps, they had
guys that had had combat.
And they were in the Corps. And they were looked up
to. They really were. So they had individual
people who had been enlisted men then who had gone
to Europe and now they, after combat they had, they
received appointments to West Point to start.
Some of them had been, even one guy had been a
captain. No kidding. And a pilot. Mm-hmm. But in
the reserve.
And then when he was commissioned, what did they
commission him as? He had already been
commissioned, so what did they commission him? He
resigned that commission. He resigned the
commission to go to... Well, he doesn't have to
resign his reserve commission. He goes in as a vet.
He still is a reserve captain.
That's a peculiar situation. Yeah, it was a
peculiar situation.
They looked up to him. Yeah, they really did.
During this time, of course, there was an attempt,
which was successful, to separate the Army Air
Corps from the Army and make it the Air Force. What
were your feelings on this? I was elated. Why? I
wanted to be separate from the Army. Well, you were
a West Point graduate. That had nothing to do with
it, in terms of air power. Because air power was
subordinated to people who didn't know enough
about it. And they proved that when they made the
Joint Chiefs of Staff. Even during the war,
the head of the Air Corps was made General of the Air
Force, General Arnold.
The three separate services, in my opinion, the
Air Force should not be subordinated to the Army,
because it goes beyond the Army, where the Army is
not even involved in strategic bombing and so
forth. So all of us that were in the Air Corps, Happy
to serve
in the Air
Force. You just wanted your independence.
And commanding and being under command yourself.
Yeah, and being under commanders. Who were Air
Corps people. Air Corps people and not Army. You
were
teaching at West Point at the time with a lot of Army
officers who were not Air Corps types. What were
the feelings toward this?